Testing, testing, testing, one, two, three.
One, two, three, testing, testing, testing.
This is December 14.
We're in the Evans Library, and I have the honor and pleasure of chatting with Dr. George Bass.
The director, is that the title, of the underwater?
I am the
founder of the Institute of Nautical Archaeology, which affiliated with Texas A&M in 1976.
And I was then the first head of the Nautical Archaeology program.
But now I'm simply a retiring professor and will be retired in a few weeks.
To introduce yourself to anyone who would hear this tape or read the transcript of it, give us a biographical summary.
before you got here?
Where did you grow up?
What did mom and dad do?
Where did you go to school?
Where did you serve before A&M?
I was born on December 9, 1932, in Columbia, South Carolina.
My grandfather, George Walkup, was the head of the
English Department, lived in the only house still standing after the Civil War in Columbia, which is now the President's home, but it's called the Walk-Up House.
So I saw a lot of the campus.
My mother met my father when he came.
from the farm to major in English and they got married.
My father then became an English professor there, but shortly before the war was called into active duty in the Navy and went to Annapolis.
So I really, from the age of eight on, was a Marylander.
I went to Johns Hopkins University.
followed by where I got a master's degree in Eastern Archaeology.
I do not have a bachelor's degree.
There was a plan that you could do that, followed by two years at the American School of Classical Studies at Athens.
At that time, I was called on to active duty in the Army.
It was after the Korean War, but I spent most of my time in Korea, came out in 1959, and then I needed German for graduate school.
And my father by then was teaching at Furman University in Greenville, South Carolina.
And so in summer school, I was in a class, a German class, and a very bright, attractive young woman sitting in front of me.
Ann Singletary was studying German for her graduate work at the Eastman School of Music.
And so we went out and got engaged.
And then I went on to the University of Pennsylvania to be in my
doctoral studies, and she went to the Eastman School to work on her master's degree in music.
I had already, as a student in Greece between 55 and 57, had the opportunity to work on land digs, one in Greece and one in Turkey,
The one in Turkey was directed at a place called Gordian, where King Midas was the king.
And the director was Rodney Young, the head of the classical archaeology department at the University of Pennsylvania.
He clearly thought highly of my fieldwork, because he tried to get me to direct within a few months after my appearance at Penn, was looking for an excavation for me to direct.
One in Libya fell through.
The sponsor chose someone else.
But then one day he said he had a letter from someone who had found a Bronze Age shipwreck off the coast of Turkey.
And this person said that he was curious to see whether one could excavate underwater as carefully as people excavated on land.
And with the University of Pennsylvania Museum, sponsor an expedition to see if this was possible.
So Rodney Young asked me if I'd like to learn how to dive to be the archaeologist.
I took six lessons of a 10-lesson YMCA course and left for Turkey in April.
And that's how Underwater Archaeology really got started because that was the first shipwreck ever excavated in its entirety on the seabed.
Now, when was that?
What year?
That was the summer of 1960.
The person who had found the wreck was a New York photojournalist, Peter Throckmorton, who is no longer alive, but he is really, people often say I'm the father of underwater archaeology, but it was his idea.
The Bodrum Museum, which is the finest museum of underwater archaeology now in the
the whole Mediterranean there in Turkey.
That was his idea.
He had, however, no college degree, and so he didn't have the credentials to do what I could do.
And so we really ran the project together that first year.
My wife had never been out of the United States.
Oh, we got married, I forgot, in March.
I left in April.
We had no honeymoon.
We had one or two days together.
And then she was to join me three months later when she finished her master's degree.
And so she assumed that wherever she would go with her new husband, she'd have at least an upright piano, maybe not a baby grand.
So she had, when she got to Turkey, and took a bus all by herself halfway across Turkey on unpaved roads, and then got a fishing boat to bring us out overnight to the camp, and she arrived.
with two suitcases, one full of music, piano music, and one with clothes, and then she saw the pup tent on the beach where we were to spend the next three months, where there was a cliff all around us, and sometimes the rocks would fall down at night, and we'd all run out and stand in the sea waist deep until we figured there'd not be a landslide, and then go back to bed.
That's how it all started.
And it kept going.
Okay.
So I stayed on, continued the underwater work.
I was going to go back to land archaeology, but we had a Frenchman and a German with us, and the Frenchman, in fact, had lent me the pup tent because I didn't have one where Ann and I spent our honeymoon for three months.
His name is Claude Dutwy, and I mention his name because his name will come up later.
And he said, look, we've really started something good now, this underwater archaeology, and we can't do it without you because you're the only archaeologist in the group.
They were just divers.
So come on back.
And so they convinced me to come back the next year to Turkey, and we would do a Byzantine shipwreck.
And so the next four years, while I was working on my doctorate at Penn, I did a Byzantine ship, and we spent
a great deal of time developing new techniques for working beneath the sea.
For example, in 1963, when I was still a graduate student, I placed an order, I raised the money, and placed an order with General Dynamics, Electric Boat Division in Groton, Connecticut, to build the first privately owned research submersible in the history of the United States, called the Asherah, after a Phoenician sea goddess, and we took it to Turkey in 64 and again in 67, and that was the pioneer.
I don't think there are many people that know that
You know, some archaeologists did that or developed the first method of mapping the seabed with stereophotography when the Navy and the National Geographic Cartographic Department and top aerial surveys all said it was impossible, it was too complex.
So we invented a number of things in those early years to make diving more efficient.
And this was all under the auspices of the University of Pennsylvania?
That was all while I was still a graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania.
I got my doctorate in 1964 and joined the faculty.
And then it's interesting, it's ironic that Turkey has just passed a new rule this year saying you cannot direct an excavation unless you're at least an associate professor.
You cannot direct a survey unless you're at least an assistant professor.
Well, as soon as I began to teach, I didn't have so much time to dig and publish, so I only went back in 67 and 69.
until I left Penn in 1973 to do underwater archaeology.
The finest underwater archaeology done around the world from the Caribbean to the Mediterranean, whether in Cyprus or in Turkey or probably there are other countries that I could think of, has been done by graduate students because they have the time to devote 100 percent of their energy to it and not, you know, teaching and administering and that sort of thing.
So I stayed on the faculty and we did another Byzantine rec in those years.
And then in 1969, so I'm getting close to Texas A&M, in 1969 one of our dearest friends in this group, Eric Ryan, who was the head of the art department at Colgate University, had an embolism.
Luckily, we had a doctor in the recompression chamber, and he was treated and lived, but he never recovered sensation down the left side of his body.
And just a year or two later, when he was about 40 years old, he died of pneumonia.
Whether this contributed or not, we'll never know, but he never seemed to be strong again.
That same summer, just a month later, a sponge diver was brought to us
who had had the bends in very bad shape and he was put into the chamber and seemed to be getting better and then he began calling for his wife and mother and died in the chamber and then I was locked in
keep the doctor company and I'd never been around a dead person before but I sat in there for six hours as the pressure was released.
These two things upset me so much that I thought I've had now a good decade.
I don't want to take a dead friend out of the water ever and it's hazardous work and so I left the field of underwater archaeology.
I remember writing to the
President of the National Geographic and saying, you know, here I'm just not even 40 years old and I'm going to have a completely new life.
And so I started a land dig in southern Italy in 1971.
And as we were digging, finding little tiny pieces of broken pottery, I kept thinking,
A wreck is so much better preserved than this.
We were trying to see the origins of animal husbandry in this part of Italy, about 6000 BC, and I thought there might be a wreck between Yugoslavia and Italy where this information is going to be better found.
And when I'd go to Bari or someplace on the sea, I miss the smell of the sea.
I miss the camaraderie of an underwater excavation, where you have such a greater mix of people.
On a land dig, you may have six archaeologists.
So you just talk archaeology.
On an underwater dig, you have a chief diver.
You have a mechanic.
You have a physician.
You have a great variety of people.
And we're all learning from one another.
And I like the interdisciplinary nature of it.
In 1969, when all these things had happened, I was teaching a full-time teacher at Penn, running what the head of U.S.
Navy in diving and salvage said was the largest diving operation in the world.
He said nobody else in the world has 20 people going down to 130 feet twice a day for three months.
I was doing it without any secretary, without any student assistant.
Ann used to help me tremendously, even when she was teaching music.
I raised enough money to hire a graduate assistant, but I think that I just got burned out.
And I started the land dig in Italy, but then I missed it.
So I thought, well, instead of being driven out of the field because of the problems, maybe the thing to do is to overcome the problems.
And so with Fred Van Dornick, who had been a fellow graduate student with me from 1961,
We, in the summer of 1972, started dreaming of an institute devoted to nautical archaeology, which is what we then called our field, Shipwreck Archaeology.
And so I decided to leave Penn.
No, I didn't.
I decided to form an institute devoted to this new field of nautical archaeology so that we could devote our full attention to it.
wrote a paper, which I still have somewhere on file, I assume, and proposed to the University of Pennsylvania Museum an institute of nautical archaeology, and I would be the head of it.
I asked for three things.
I said I would like to be a non-teaching person because it would just take too much time to be a full-time teacher and run this.
I wanted also to have something that would allow us to
work in the field for more than three months at a time.
Traditionally, archaeology was done during faculty summer vacations.
Well, if you go to Turkey and you have only three months, you have to ship your equipment over, you have to get it through customs, then you go to Ankara and spend
a week or two or three, getting the permit.
And then you go out and you put up your camp, and you get your barge in place.
And then you die for six weeks, and then you have to tear everything down and put things away.
And so if you raise a certain amount of money, I'd say 80% of it's gone the first day you die.
And then it's just fuel and food.
So you could triple your efficiency if you could work for three or four months at a time.
So I said, I want the ability to go abroad for six months, a year, whatever it took.
And I said, and I want to ask the museum for a penny, not even for my own salary.
I'll go out and try to raise it.
And then there was a third thing.
But at any rate, the museum said I couldn't have any of those.
It said that would set a precedent.
You have to be a teacher.
And so I went and I thought about it, and without any idea whatsoever where I'd get the money, I sent a year's notice that I was resigning with a tenured physician at the University of Pennsylvania, where I'd been groomed to be the next department chairman, and that department was thought to be the best department of classical archaeology in the nation.
Now, why did I do this?
The head of the department, Rodney Young, who had first asked me to learn to dive, clearly was grooming me to take over when he retired in just two or three years.
He was, I know, quite sad when I left.
But he looked at me and said, I'm sad you're leaving, but you have to leave, and I can understand.
You've got the 40 fidgets.
And I just was turning 40.
He said that's when he changed and came to Penn from Greece where he had a chance to make his career.
So it was the 40 fidgets was part of it.
And there was another part which I've seldom revealed, but I'll go ahead and reveal it now.
Part of the reason for forming the Institute was based on my fear of flying.
I crossed the Atlantic 28 times by ship.
Before I ever flew across, I had a tremendous phobia about planes.
which I'm over now, but I fly a lot now.
But nothing, nothing.
I even had an invitation once to the White House to have lunch with President Kennedy, and I was too embarrassed to say why I couldn't come, but I just would not have flown across the Atlantic for anything.
So I think part of this was that I would go over it during the nice summer when the weather's not so bad and come back the next summer.
But at any rate, they say I couldn't have any of these things, so I sent in the letter of resignation.
The director of the museum came and said, you're leaving.
Why?
And I said, well, I wanted these three things, and you said I couldn't have them.
He said, oh, we could work that out.
And I said, well, it's too late.
We didn't, did we?
And the chairman of the board had echoed him, saying, you can't have these things.
And I pointed out that the precedent had already been set, that the head of their scientific laboratories, carbon-14 and tree-ring dating, was a non-teaching member of the museum.
He said, well, I guess you're right.
And we remained good friends.
I mean, it was no hard feelings.
But I think I called their bluff, and they didn't think I would.
So my wife and I, in 1973, sold our house, our car, all of our furniture, except her baby grand piano and my grandfather's desk.
pictures off the wall.
Two women came in and put stickers on things.
We sat next to her, watched them take out the children's toys, everything, to move to the island of Cyprus to start a good life.
Cyprus was chosen because one of my students at Penn, Michael Katzev, had gone there and excavated a Greek shipwreck and was still working on it.
Then another little part of this picture comes in, and that is from 1963 on, a man who had an electrical business in Denver, Pennsylvania, about 60 miles or so from Philadelphia, named Dick Steffi.
had read about my work in National Geographic, and he said that he was a very serious model builder.
He wasn't interested in display models, but he liked to make models to see how things worked.
And so he had lectured to my classes, and then Michael Katzebitt got a UNESCO grant for him to come
to Turkey, to Cyprus for a year and put physically put together this fourth century BC Greek ship that they excavated off the coast.
So Michael said, why don't you put your headquarters in Cyprus?
And so I would be president, Michael would be vice president, and Dick was already there.
So we moved to Cyprus, we got there, we drove across
And we had headaches.
We didn't know why.
We found out it was 111 degrees.
Ann sat on the edge of the bed and wept that evening and said, what in the world did I ever want to go live in a desert?
Because that's the way it felt that day.
It was so hot.
But we did.
And I left her to get the kids into English-speaking schools and set up housekeeping when I went off to Turkey.
Let me tell you what we did in order to do this, and that is that I was the highest paid member of the institute as president.
I was making $13,000 a year.
Michael Katz said I was making $8,000.
We hired for $3,000 a year, but we put him up in our house and fed him a young man named John Gifford, who's now on the faculty at the University of Miami.
He only had a master's degree, though, and he was a bachelor, so he only needed $3,000 a year to live on.
We had no fringe benefits, no life insurance, no pension.
No health insurance, but it was a gamble and so that's how we lived for the next two or three years.
I had been headed off for Turkey
and lived in Turkish fishing boats for three months looking for shipwrecks, sleeping in the fish hole, eating in the deck out of a communal pot.
I'm going to mention that when I give my commencement address day after tomorrow, that there are other riches than just monetary.
I mean, it was a wonderful experience.
And we found wrecks that we're still excavating today.
It was a very successful season.
We had a $10,000 grant from the National Geographic Society.
Oh, how did we get the money to even live on $13,000, $12,000?
I wrote to a man named Jack Kelly, a Tulsa businessman, whom I'd known and had often said he'd be interested in supporting something we're doing.
And I said I was leaving Penn to form a private institute of nautical archaeology.
He said immediately, he called me on the phone and said, this is terribly exciting.
I pledge $10,000 a year for the next three years.
And I have a friend I think will do the same.
And that was John Baird, who lived in Cleveland.
And John Baird is 92 years old now and still on our board.
His daughter's now on our board.
Jack served until last year on our board.
And so then Michael Katzeb had one of his sponsors, John Brown Cook,
that pledged 10,000 a year for five years.
And then we got some smaller pledges of 5,000 and 3,000.
But essentially, we had $50,000 a year for the first few years.
But we could get grants.
And I got a grant from the National Geographic Society.
Mel Payne, a founding director, who was at that time either president or chairman of the board of the National Geographic, showed up at our board meeting in Philadelphia with a check for $10,000 for our first survey.
And that's how we hired the Turkish fishing boats that we lived on.
I went back to Cyprus, and things went well there.
And so we started our first field school in the summer of 1974.
And after just about seven or eight days of diving, we heard on the radio that there had been a coup on Cyprus, that the government had been overthrown.
And then, I don't know whether it was the same day or the next day, but very shortly thereafter, the Turkish army and navy crossed to Cyprus because of the Turkish Cypriot population.
And the war broke out.
Ann and I rushed back as soon as we could to see our house.
The excavation was stopped immediately by the military because we were so close to the border with Greece, and people thought a major war may break out.
So I thought that our institute was all over.
Maybe we were in Turkey for two or three weeks.
That's all that summer.
I'd raised money from National Geographic and elsewhere.
And it was very discouraging to think that we had nothing to show for it, what we hadn't really done very much.
So we hurried back.
We realized this was no place to try to continue because some of us lived on the Greek side and some on the Turkish side, so we left Cyprus and that's when one of our group that summer, Pierre Bikai, who was Lebanese, said,
your headquarters in Beirut because we Lebanese are like the good life too much to do anything silly like the Cypriots.
And so we got in this old mini bus that was a rattle trap with our kids and Pierre and drove down through Syria to Lebanon and almost did it.
We got permission to move our headquarters from Cyprus to Beirut.
But something told us not to, luckily, because just a year later their civil war broke out.
So that was the first time I'd ever flown across the Atlantic.
We came back.
Some of the directors said, you know, you just tried to form an institute at the wrong time, why don't you just give up?
And I was making $13,000 a year, and we just bought a little car, a second-hand car in Cyprus.
That had been destroyed in the world.
We sold it for $70 scrap.
We'd just bought some furniture, stoves and stuff.
We just left all that behind.
and we flew home with what we could, and we had to pay overweight for some steamer trunks.
So I suspect that probably in one day I lost, say, $6,000 or $13,000 in my salary.
But still, I went back and I bought, I remember, I bought a $200 suit, the most expensive piece of clothes I'd ever owned, because I didn't want to look like I was coming back with my tail between my legs.
I walked into the University of Pennsylvania standing tall, like everything, it was just rosy, of course not having any idea what we were going to do.
And one of our directors, Betsy Whitehead, who had been a student of mine, an older student when her children grew up, said, you know, my husband, Jack, is setting up the Whitehead Institute at MIT.
And he had made, at that time, the largest philanthropic gift ever made to a university.
It was over $100 million.
And the Whitehead Institute I still read about from time to time.
They're both dead now.
But she said it's going to be affiliated.
It's going to be there at MIT, but it's not going to be part of the university.
But they'll share facilities.
They'll share staff.
And maybe find a university to give you a home.
I had no idea how to shop for a university home, but somehow the University of North Carolina Wilmington campus heard about us and said that they would like to put our institute there.
And so I went down and interviewed several times.
There was an old
Am I going on too long?
No, no, no.
This is exactly what we want.
It's why I came to Texas A&M, it's kind of a funny story.
They had an old brown shingle building built on piers poured out over the water there.
They say they'd give that to us and that could be our headquarters.
And Dick Steffie and I were so thrilled.
Oh yeah, Dick Steffie had joined us shortly before the war broke out.
He said, George, I'd like to, I'm going to backtrack.
Part of the reason I think I had the nerve
to leave Penn without knowing what the future would hold.
Because one day, driving back from looking at some old early 20th century ship remains that had washed up on a beach in New Jersey that some people had told us about, Dick Steffi was with his wife and I was with Ann in two different cars.
And he pulled way over the side of the road, and he came back.
He said, George, I'm going to tell you something.
I've decided to give up my business and become a professional ship reconstructor.
And I said, Dick, you're crazy.
You're going to starve to death.
But that's when he got this UNESCO grant to go to Cyprus.
So that's why he was already there along with the rest of us.
He hadn't actually sold his business, but his brother was running it in his absence.
So he came to me one day and said, George, I really want to be part of this institute.
I said, Dick, I don't have any money.
And he said, well, I really want to be part.
And I said, well, I could maybe offer you a job.
He had two teenage children.
And I was embarrassed.
We were eating pizza right on the harbor front in Karenia.
And finally I said, well, I can offer you $5,000 a year.
He said, I'll take it.
I said, no fringe benefits.
He said, I'll do it.
And I think what's nice is that those of us who gambled the most actually won the most because Dick ended up being the second, I think, MacArthur Fellow, which meant that he got $65,000 tax-free on top of his salary here when he joined the faculty.
But at any rate, so he was part of it.
So when we went back to the States, we didn't have any idea what to do, where to live.
So Ann and I just moved to Denver, Pennsylvania because it was near Dick and his wife went back
in the school system as a librarian or something so he could get some fringe benefits.
And we used to dream and talk all the time about what we would do.
So when we heard that we might go to the University of North Carolina, Wilmington, we drove down to actually look for houses to buy.
I'm a South Carolinian by birth.
My wife is a North Carolinian by birth, and we met in South Carolina, so the idea of moving to that part of the country had a certain appeal.
But then the head of the anthropology department, with whom I was negotiating, said, we would like you to add a new world archaeologist to do the civil warships off of our own coast.
So I gave that a little thought, and shortly thereafter, there was a national meeting of underwater archaeologists.
I think it was in Charleston.
And I thought to myself, who is the best underwater archaeologist in America?
It's Carl Clausen, the state underwater archaeologist of Texas.
who has just excavated or is excavating the 1554 fleet at Padre Island.
So, as academics do, I went over to Carl and said how INA, or in those days it was AINA, the American Institute of Nautical Archaeology.
We shortened it in later years.
Because of the international nature of our work and the international funding we get, we just shortened the Institute of Nautical Archaeology.
I said, do you know some young person that might like to join us to be our new oral archaeologist?
Which was, I didn't want to insult him by saying, do you want to leave Texas?
And I knew what might happen, what I hope would happen, and half an hour later he came over and said, hey, let's go have a coffee.
And then we sat down and said, you know, I'd be interested.
My wife is North Carolinian.
And I've lived in Texas now, and it'd be nice to move back.
And so that was it.
It was all set.
One day, Carl Clausen called and said, I have a friend.
He was still living in Austin.
He had a little, he called it his ranch.
He had two cows outside of Austin.
He said, I have a friend at Texas A&M.
And to this day, I don't know who it was.
It may have been Vaughn Bryant.
I don't know.
And why don't I get them to make a counteroffer so we're in a better bargaining position with the people of North Carolina?
And so I said, that's fine.
Why not?
And he called, I don't know, a couple of weeks later and said, he was laughing, almost hysterically.
He said, George, you better have your story straight.
Because you're going to get a conference call in about a half an hour from a vice president and I think two deans.
And they're going to ask you about coming to Texas A&M.
And so half an hour later, I had a call.
And I believe it was Vice President John Calhoun and probably Dean Maxwell.
And in those days, we were first based in the College of Geosciences because they did not give a master's degree in anthropology yet.
So it would have been the dean of geosciences whose name escapes me for the moment.
That's me too right now.
But I'll probably think of it.
But at any rate, I remember the, you know, I can't imitate a Texas voice to this day, but it was harder.
you know, Dr. Bass, are you really interested to come down and join us in College Station, Texas?
And I said, well, it's certainly one of the many places we're considering.
And they said, can you come down next week?
They didn't know I was afraid to fly on an airplane.
And I said, no, but I can come in February.
I guess this is maybe December or November.
And the reason for that is I was also going to go down to Florida because in the meantime we'd been offered
a place at the Harbor Branch Foundation, which was said to have more money for undersea research than the U.S.
Navy Office of Naval Research.
So when the time came, I think it was February.
Of 70.
Oh, this would have been 60.
No, it hadn't.
Wait a minute, it would have been 60.
No, it's got to be in the 70s with Calhoun.
Oh, I'm sorry, 70s.
It would have been, okay, the Cyprus War is in 74, so it would have been 75, the spring of February of 75.
I took a train down to the Harbor Branch Foundation in Florida, and I already knew Ed Link, the inventor of the Link trainer, who was a pioneer in underwater archaeology, and then I met Seward Johnson of Johnson & Johnson, the air of Johnson & Johnson air.
And they couldn't have been nicer and more gracious, and they offered me a building just as they had done.
But I thought, well, this is not really – no, I was still thinking about it.
So then I rented a car, still afraid to fly, in Orlando, no, wherever I was in Florida on the coast, and said, could I drop it off in Texas?
And they found some heap that broke down on the way, and I got here, and I finally got to Texas A&M, and I met with John Calhoun, Jay Llewellyn, and his boss was...
the head of the Research Foundation, Fred Benson, Dean Maxwell, and again it must have been the Dean of the College of Geosciences.
Or Nerdy.
He may have been there.
I know that later he told me he played a role in bringing me, but I didn't remember, you know, that well.
I didn't take any notes.
But they didn't know, probably, how desperate we were because we still had a good reputation.
We were digging with grants from the National Geographic Society.
And I think, honestly, that they didn't realize exactly what we did.
At that time, it was some archaeologists who were just starting to make money for their host institutes.
by the new laws that meant before you could say drill for oil, you had to see that there was nothing there.
And so there were people out in the Gulf riding around with magnetometers and sonar.
I don't think they ever found a wreck, but they were paid great sums of money by the oil companies before they could drill to make sure they weren't going to put a drill in the middle of a shipwreck.
And so I think that the whole idea will be part more of the geosciences.
Somebody may even mention we might be in Galveston or we would like to be in Galveston.